The best way to learn something is by doing it, I couldn't agree less after the amazing experience at Haxter2, a 12 hour hackathon at GR Tech park, Bangalore. I am not a great fan of classroom teaching, and unless I prove it to my lazy brain that "Mate, this seems important, pick it up!" it prefers to travel light. I registered for Haxter2 because I wanted to motivate myself, see the experienced minds at work and subject myself to ad hoc learning. And I got more than I could've ever asked for.

Being from an electronics background, I have learnt only Assembly and C at college. Complex and fun languages, but there wasn't much you could do with these languages unless you write a zillion lines of codes. Enter training phase at Sapient where I discovered JavaScript and within few hours I was already doing amazing stuff modifying static web pages and adding interactive components. And with JavaScript comes the dense forest of JS libraries and APIs spread all over the Internet. It is impossible to master all of them. When I first saw posters of Haxter2 put up all over the office space, I saw it as an opportunity to start my exploration in the woods of JS libraries and APIs.

While I was thinking of a good idea for the hackathon, my colleague Harish came up with a brilliant idea of developing a family tree application. The idea was simple and that's where the brilliance lies! In the age of nuclear families we aren't as close to our relatives as we should be. Our parents were much closer to their relatives than us. As most of us have left our villages and home towns in search of better opportunities in metropolitans in cities, we've lost touch with our distant cousins, uncles and aunts. And the solution is Facebook. We've our relatives added on Facebook and it shouldn't be difficult to actually link accounts and discover new relations. With this brilliant idea Harish Kulur, Debasish Shanti and me (Chetan K) formed the 'Gang of Tres' and registered for Haxter2.

The D Day : There should've been a paragraph before this titled 'Preparation for Haxter2', sadly there wasn't any, and we soon realized the hard way that we should have. After a normal day at office, we reached 5th floor Vayu block to register for the event. The mood was good and spirits were high, we set out to inspect the battlefield watching experienced professionals delegating work, drawing complex diagrams and talking technical jargon. It was a delight watching the pros at work. According to the rules of Haxter2 personal laptops couldn't be connected to Sapient LAN for internet, and with our current knowledge we had to refer to google pretty often to even start working, so we didn't get any personal laptops. Although we wanted to be on the 5th floor to watch and learn from other teams we had to settle with workstations (Intel i7-4770 processor, 3.40GHz clock, and 16GB RAM! WOAH!!) on Takshashila Lab, 6th floor, Vayu Block. Not far from the battlefield.

After the initial kickoff by the senior members of Sapient we started working. We started with reading the Facebook API and it was not as easy as we thought. I'm just out of college and still don't have a programmer's patience. So the group was indeed a bit discouraged at first. But I had a lot of hopes on the idea which kept us going. The Facebook API was a bit complicated to understand and the working with Parse was taking some time. But we were making progress, slow and steady.

While we were still struggling to make our way through the Facebook APIs. The organizing committee called us to witness a performance by Debjit Mukherjee, and we seriously needed a break. Fortunately it was postponed and we got an opportunity to have good chat with the senior members present there. They were thrilled when they got to know what we we're working on, they encouraged us a lot. Failure was not an option we could afford.

We focused all our attention towards the development of the app and kept GUI development on hold. We managed to understand and deploy our code on parse, so we finally had a dummy app up and running, that raised our hopes. While Harish and Debasish were working on getting the Facebook graph API working, I was working on the algorithm to relate the incoming data.

Things seemed much better now. We won puzzle challenge and got a box full of chocolates, which was followed by an infinite supply of brownies and cheese sandwiches. Kudos to the organizing committee for the delicious snacks which kept us up and running through the night.

By 4 the final integration was not done, but the individual components were working fine and we encountered no bug we couldn't fix easily. According to my experience that's something fishy! The presentation was scheduled to start at 5:30 AM and we were only half done. We needed a dummy family on Facebook to test and demonstrate, and creating fake email IDs and Facebook profile took a lot of time. It took us an hour to realize that its eating up a lot of our precious time, so Harish, Debasish and I became virtual cousins on Facebook to demonstrate the app. Right then, hell broke loose and the the hidden bug attacked us. We stepped into the code, and got our hands dirty.

We were already past our 5:30AM deadline and the presentations had already started. Being freshers I was glad that we came this far but we didn't want to give up, not at this stage. Special thanks to Nisheed for forcing us to try till the last moment. We had very little time on our hands and presentations were about to get over. Then Debasish struck gold! It was a synchronization issue with the Facebook server, he solved it and the app was running. With whatever we had at hand, we rushed to deliver the presentation and yet again, the judges were amused with the concept. We finally managed to deliver a decent presentation and close the chapter with a happy ending. But we had more in store for us!

The results were announced and we were there among the top 6! Harish was so surprised, but secretly I wasn't :) I had faith in the concept and it just worked. The next round was presentation. It takes a child's curiosity and a wise man's expertise to develop apps such as those at Haxter2. We witnessed the best of those in the final presentation. 'The Gang Of Tres' volunteered to give the presentation first and we used StoryScaping to our advantage to narrate how the app can get together lost relations. All three of us explained in our own way how the app can be used to bring families together.

Here's why I thought that the app can be of great help : Both my parents belong from south India, but my father has a transferable job and I've spent almost all of my childhood above the tropic of cancer. When I came to Bangalore to pursue my engineering degree, I couldn't meet any relatives here. Although I was supposed to feel home, I felt as if I'm in a foreign country. It took me long time to discover my relatives here and contact them. It would've helped me a lot if I'd known them much in advance. It's time that social media connects not just friends but family as well.

Although we didn't win Haxter2, I was happy. We were appreciated by the jury and many other participants and organizers for participating in Haxter2. On 23rd August when I finally saw sunlight after almost 12 hours, I was glad that I learnt something. The inspiration we got from the jury is enough to keep me going.

I would like to thank Neha Ramani and Sajan John for encouraging us freshers to participate in Haxter2, Nisheed Jagadish for not letting us give up and the organizing committee for their support and great food!
